---
title: 'All about Java'
date: 2020-03-29
---


### Java Tutorial

1 Syntax

A class should always starts with an uppercase first letter. 

2 Comments

`//` is used for single line comments. 

`/* */` is used for multi-line comments.

3 Variables

Must specify the type and assign value (later). `type variable = value;`

Types include `String`, `int`, `float`, `char` and `boolean`. 

Adding `final` keyword will declare the variable as "constant". E.g. `final int myNum = 15;`

4 Data Types

String values must be surrounded by double quotes.

5 Type Casting

Widening Casting (automatically) - converting a smaller type to a larger type size : `byte` -> `short` -> `char` -> `int` -> `long` -> `float` -> `double`

Narrowing Casting (manually) - converting a larger type to a smaller size type :
`double` -> `float` -> `long` -> `int` -> `char` -> `short` -> `byte`

6 Operators

`!` : logical not

7 Strings

A String is an object that contain methods. `string.length()`

8 If ... Else

Short hand if ... else expression: `variable = (condition) ? expressionTrue : expressionFalse; ` 

9 For Loop

`for (statement 1; statement 2; statement 3)`. s1 is executed one time before the code block; s2 defines the condition for executing the code block; s3 is sexcuted every time after the code block has been executed. 

A for-each loop is used exclusively to loop through elements in an array. 



### Java Methods

Instead of defining methods that do the same thing, it is better to overload one.

Multiple methods can have the same name as long as the number and/or type of parameters are different. 



### Java Classes

1 Classes/Objects

A class is a template for objects, and an object is an instance of a class.

(a class should always start with an uppercase first letter, and that the name of the java file should match the class name)

2 Class Methods

a `static` method can be accessed without creating an object of the class, unlike `public` can only be accessed by objects.

3 Constructors

A constructor is a special method that is used to initialize objects. The constructor is called when an object of a class is created. It can be used to set initial values for object attributes. (the constructor name must match the class name, and it cannot have a return type like `void`)

4 Encapsulation

Make sure that "sensitive" data is hidden from users: 1. declare class variables/attributes as `private`; 2. provide public `get` and `set` methods to access and update the value of a `private` variable. 

```java
public class Person {
  private String name;
 
  // Getter
  public String getName() {
    return name;
  }

  // Setter
  public void setName(String name) {
    this.name = name;
  }
}
```

5 Inheritance

inherit attributes and methods from one class to another using `extends` keyword. 

6 Polymorphism

Inheritance lets us inherit attributes and methods from another class. Polymorphism uses those methods to perform different tasks. This allows us to perform a single action in different ways.

7 Abstraction

The `abstract` keyword is a non-access modifier, used for classes and methods: 1) Abstract class: is a restricted class that cannot be used to create objects (to access it, it must be inherited from another class); 2) Abstract method: can only be used in an abstract class, and it does not have a body. The body is provided by the subclass (inherited from).

An abstract class can have both abstract and regular methods

8 Interface

Interface is another way to achieve abstraction which is a completely abstract class that is used to group related methods with empty bodies.

To access the interface methods, the interface must be implemented (kinda like inherited) by another class with the `implements` keyword (instead of `extends`). 

9 Enums

An `enum` is a special "class" that represents a group of constants (unchangeable variables, like `final` variables).

To create an `enum`, use the `enum` keyword (instead of class or interface), and separate the constants with a comma. Note that they should be in uppercase letters. Access `enum` constants with the dot syntax